---
date: "2024-02-23"
description: "First step in figuring out diagrams in a docs-as-code world."
paige:
  file_link:
    disable: false
  style: |
    #paige-authors,
    #paige-date,
    #paige-keywords,
    #paige-reading-time,
    #paige-series,
    #paige-toc,
    .paige-authors,
    .paige-date,
    .paige-date-header,
    .paige-keywords,
    .paige-reading-time,
    .paige-series,
    .paige-summary {
        display: block;
    }
series: ["writing"]
tags: ["docs-as-code", "diagrams-as-code"]
title: "Learning Mermaid"
---

## Context
Last year I dove into the docs-as-code world. I was mesmerized and intimidated by all the available tools out there. Since those initial findings and feelings, I've become more familiar with markdown and static site generators. One gaping hole in my attempt to grasp everything-as-code is diagramming. The first tool that I was exposed to was [Mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org).

## Opportunity
In my [Bicycle Inventory API](../../../portfolio/bicycle_inventory_api_app) project, I had the opportunity to give Mermaid a try to show an entity relationship diagram. I only needed to show an entity and not a relationship since I only have one database table, but baby steps, right?!

## Enabling Mermaid
The first problem that I encountered was that I could not simply start using markdown to code a diagram. Mermaid requires a module, plugin, API, or some sort of integration to render the diagrams. In my case, my website is built with the Hugo static site generator. According to [Hugo Docs](https://gohugo.io/content-management/diagrams/#mermaid-diagrams), I had to incorporate a code block and JavaScript code snippet into my layout and content template to render Mermaid diagrams on my site. 

## Building a Mermaid Diagram
Since my example is so simple, I had very little issue creating my diagram, but it's important to note the helpful resources that quickly got me to a rendered diagram. First, you have to find the right [diagram type](https://mermaid.js.org/intro/#diagram-types). Next, you can use the [Mermaid Live Editor](https://mermaid.live/) to code and test out your diagram. Once I was satisfied with my diagram, I *tried* incorporating it into my markdown file. I noticed that Hugo had said that I had to put any diagram in a code block, but the diagram looked way too small when rendered on my website. After a long time scouring the internet, I discovered that not all Mermaid diagram types can scale. For example, in a flowchart, you can configure the text size, but, in an entity relationship diagram, you can only configure the theme/color of the diagram. 

### Example
```
---
title: Bicycle Inventory DB Table
---
erDiagram

    bicycles{
        bicycle_id SERIAL PK
        make varchar(50)
        model varchar(50)
        groupset varchar(50)
        frame_type varchar(50)
        frame_size varchar(50)
        prime_color varchar(50)
        model_year int
        crank_length varchar(50)
    }
```
I was frustrated that I could not configure my diagram to the exact look-and-feel that I thought was required for my website, and this configuration limitation exposed a bigger issue—that these docs-as-code tools are not perfect and cannot do everything you may want. So, I live with what is on my site. 

## Next Steps
I can look at a variety of other diagrams-as-code solutions. The Hugo static site generator natively supports GoAT Diagrams, but I'm interested in trying others as well. One thing to keep in mind is maintainability and supportability. Many of these docs-as-code tools are held up by a small community of folks, so just as quickly as a tool can come into common usage, it can also lose its support community and become obsolete. 

