+++
date = 2024-06-25
description = "I...finished!"
series = ["cycling"]
tags = ["cycling", "running", "triathlon"]
title = "Ironman 70.3 Eagleman Results 2024"
[paige]
edit = "https://github.com/pbj-writes/portfolio_hugo/edit/main/content/%s"
[paige.list_page]
disable_authors = false
disable_date = false
disable_keywords = false
disable_reading_time = false
disable_summary = false
[paige.pages]
disable_authors = false
disable_date = false
disable_keywords = false
disable_next = true
disable_prev = true
disable_reading_time = false
disable_series = false
disable_toc = false
[paige.site]
disable_breadcrumbs = true
disable_credit = true
disable_license = true
+++

Okay, I did it! I finished an Ironman 70.3. I was hoping to finish between 5h30m and 6h. I finished in 6h6m. 

## The Swim

I practiced in open water for the first time in this training cycle the day before the race. When I practiced, it was hours beyond the time of day I would swim for the race so that the water was choppy from wind and boats. The choppiness was difficult so I downgraded my estimated time since the swim leg is self-seeded. I was originally thinking 45m to finish the swim, but with the choppiness, I changed to 50m. The next morning the water looked very calm so I readjusted and self-seeded with the 45m folks. I finished in 57m. The discrepancy is from a few factors including a lack of open water training and sighting problems. I could only breathe to my right but the buoys were on my left. During the swim, I was drifting. I ended up swimming an extra 300-400 yards. Physically, I felt great, but mentally I knew that things were not going well. When I got out of the water, I looked at my watch, accepted the result, and just moved on.

## Transition 1

When I came out of the water, I wasn't sure where the transition started (via chip timing). In retrospect, I think the checkpoint was the first bit of dry land. I walked for about 30 seconds somewhat demoralized from the swim, but I knew that I had few doubts about the next two disciplines. Leading up to the race, I chose to take my sweet time in the transitions to ensure that I was as comfortable as possible for the cycling and running portions. That is to say that I had no estimate for what my transitions might take other than one practice where I had about 7-minute transitions. This transition was 9m. I saw my friends and did a little performative changing bit for them since I was completely changing from swim gear into cycling gear. After about 8 minutes, I was ready to go but then you have to jog your bike out to the mount line. 

## The Bike

I practice on my rental tri bike the day before the race. This practice was my first time on any tri bike outside. At home, I practiced with aero bars on a stationary bike. The bike felt light, but wobbly when I was in the aero bar position. I had a feeling that the bike leg would be a bit of a wildcard; however, from beginning to end, I was in complete control of the bike and hitting my performance goals. The first half of the 56 miles had a decent headwind but I bided my time at about 18mph into the wind then kicked it up over 20mph in the second half with the tailwind. Overall, I averaged 19.4mph. There wasn't a lot to note. The bike was comfy and I was mostly passing people which helped a lot mentally. Oh, and at one of the aid stations, I threw my spent water bottle directly into the trash can at 20mph, which made me feel smooth.

## Transition 2

After the bike, I felt really good. I didn't burn out on the bike even with the headwinds. So, in the transition, I was feeling pretty confident about my sub 6h result. I took my time in the transition, which took 9m again. This time, I had to make a quick pee stop, so that added additional time. By the time that I was heading to the start of the run, I felt great. 

## The Run 

When I first started turning over my legs, I felt some fatigue from the bike, but my stride and pace felt good. I looked down at my watch and saw 7:30m/mile pace. I didn't feel like I was pushing very hard, so I was delighted. After the first mile, the heat and humidity started to take their toll. I settled into an easier 8m/mile pace. My goal for the run was to average under an 8:15m/mile pace. The sun was hot and I was slowing for each aid station to guzzle hydration and water. My friends and partner were out on the course cheering, so I was feeling pretty good until about mile 4 when the heat and humidity started to creep in. I kept pushing through until the halfway point (lap 1). I want to note that having to do 2 laps is demoralizing especially with the heat. After lap 1, I was averaging about 8:05m/mile, so I was on target, but something was afoot inside my body. I believe my core temperature was slowly rising to the point where on mile 7 my heart rate spiked and I had to drop significantly. I ended the race miserably with a nearly 9m/mile pace due to walking between and at aid stations. 

## Overall

With the way that I felt at the end of the run, I was pretty happy with 6h6m, but the competitor in me is mad that I didn't go sub-6h. If I cleaned up my transitions a bit, I definitely would've had it. But no regrets. I did this race the way I did it intentionally to enjoy and have some fun. And I did! If I had to do it again, I'd get more into swimming earlier before the race. I'd do open water swim practice. I'd invest in some tri-gear to transition faster, but that's about it. During the race, I noticed something. Simpler is better. For example, on the bike, I didn't use a bike computer. I had a watch tracking the triathlon with some metrics such as distance and alerts for every 10% of the ride, but I was more focused without staring at a screen. I think people, myself included, tend to get caught up in the screens while we're running or biking. Metric hawking at all times. I think this is great for certain times in training, but I think it's a worthy reminder to untether once in a while too ... perhaps even during a race. 

|    Proof   |
| ----------- | 
|{{< paige/image maxwidth="35rem" src="../assets/ironman_finish.jpg" >}}              |
