+++
date = 2025-05-14
description = "Linting docs."
series = ["writing"]
tags = ["writing"]
title = "Vale"
[paige]
edit = "https://github.com/pbj-writes/portfolio_hugo/edit/main/content/%s"
[paige.list_page]
disable_authors = false
disable_date = false
disable_keywords = false
disable_reading_time = false
disable_series = false
disable_summary = false
[paige.pages]
disable_authors = false
disable_date = false
disable_keywords = true
disable_next = true
disable_prev = true
disable_reading_time = false
disable_series = false
disable_toc = true
[paige.site]
disable_breadcrumbs = true
disable_credit = true
disable_license = true
+++

## Doc linting on local machine

I learned at the Write the Docs conference that folks were using VS Code and Vale together. This made me curious if folks align rules on their local machines to the rules configured on the, for example, GitHub Action/Workflow. It's great to integrate Vale into an IDE but folks also mentioned that there's no integration with other IDEs like IntelliJ. I'm not sure how true that is, but folks could still run Vale locally through the CLI.

I did the most me thing and tried to get up and running without following the docs closely. It's easy to get started: [Install Vale.](https://vale.sh/docs/install)

After installation, adding a [configuration file](https://vale.sh/docs/vale-ini) is next. I made this easy on myself and configured Vale to use the Google style guide. Don't forget `$ Vale Sync` to pull in the styles from the configuration file (`.vale.ini`).

Now, it's time to install [Vale for VS Code.](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ChrisChinchilla.vale-vscode) The hardest part was configuring this setting: `Vale › Vale CLI: Config`.

> E100 [.vale.ini not found] Runtime error no config file found Execution stopped with code 1.

To solve this, I had to have configuration at the project root directory.

The outcome:
{{< paige/image alt="Landscape" src="../assets/vale_vscode.png" >}}

## Doc linting via GitHub action

`IN PROGRESS`
