+++
date = 2025-05-07
description = "Conference debrief"
series = ["writing"]
tags = ["writing"]
title = "Write the Docs 2025"
[paige]
edit = "https://github.com/pbj-writes/portfolio_hugo/edit/main/content/%s"
[paige.list_page]
disable_authors = false
disable_date = false
disable_keywords = false
disable_reading_time = false
disable_series = false
disable_summary = false
[paige.pages]
disable_authors = false
disable_date = false
disable_keywords = true
disable_next = true
disable_prev = true
disable_reading_time = false
disable_series = false
disable_toc = true
[paige.site]
disable_breadcrumbs = true
disable_credit = true
disable_license = true
+++

## Community

After working remotely for the last five years, I've learned that you can't replace community. You can't replace people. I'm at the point where I think a hybrid work environment is better than remote (for me).

Similarly, I haven't been to a professional conference since 2013. I enjoyed feeding off the energy of people who have similar backgrounds and careers. And yet, we were all so different. After a few days, I was happy to go home, but I returned home with net new confidence, validation, and energy from like-minded folk.

## Virtuous Cycle of Writing and Docs

What was great about the writing and docs community is that people come to writing from so many different angles. Some people studied english, some studied writing, some studied computer science, and so on. Much of what I took away from the conference was about how others from different disciplines approach the business of communicating information to others.

**Video Games**
One speaker talked about how video game design can inform writing and information architecture. The example was about how Nintendo is famous for level-design. Nintendo introduces part of a mechanic safely for the player to experience the concept before moving on to a future level where that mechanic becomes more advanced. The player, who is already familiar with the mechanic, already has an idea about how to engage with the more difficult version. Documentarians have a lot to learn from this insight into gaming.

**Pictures are Science**
Another speaker discussed how he had success creating drawings for his docs. He received a lot of anecdotal feedback that the images helped readers chunk and consume the information. Next, he cited some studies that show that people are better able to consume information with pictures. In my experience, this has always been true, but I already remember hearing that people being visual learners isn't a thing. Perhaps some other point was being made, but still. I think this speaker validated how I think of docs. Images are powerful. Use them wisely.

## Doc Tech

Is it possible to have any conversation about technology without mentioning AI. Of course some people hate even the mention of AI. There was a kind of silence that would arise or even a tension whenever it was mentioned. On the other hand, some folks came to the conference to discuss AI only.

I thought one particular speaker nailed how we should feel about AI. AI is here whether we like it or not. AI is at its best when you point it to a set of content and then allow people to ask questions about your product. The AI can look through various sources of content and distill a cogent answer efficiently. The example given during the conference is [kapa.ai](https://www.kapa.ai). I liked seeing how easy it is to configure the AI to look at docs AND community pages AND support content for customers. Or, internal to an organization, the AI can look at chat histories, wikis, or source code as a workplace assistant.

Of course there are caveats. If you feed in incorrect information, the AI will distill incorrect information. So, in certain applications, it's important to monitor and cull incorrect content on a community page for instance. One of the best insights was that if you point AI to your documentation, you'll find out what's missing and what kind of biases you have. For example, human documentarians have a tendency to write about what's included but not what's excluded. An AI chatbot would expose these biases and  provide a feedback loop for improving the docs.

Another tech learning was that [Vale](https://vale.sh) can plug into the CI/CD pipeline but also into the VS Code IDE. I'm curious if I can setup a strict set of rules in the IDE but then perhaps a smaller, core set of rules in the CI/CD. I feel another blog post coming 😇

## Summary

Validation was probably the most important take away from the conference. So many people were willing to talk about what they didn't know and how they were flailing. I'm constantly feeling like that at work and plenty of people confirmed that they are too. I think what we all have in common is that we want to learn even if it's hard and messy and even embarrassing.
